---
title: "Graphics API"
weight: 100102
---
API stands for Application Programming Interface. Basically a set of conventions / standards, compute engineers have come up with to write the software into. We need to pick sides here.

Choosing a graphics API to base our software upon is one of the most fundametnal design design we are going to make. For all practical purpose (read sunk man-month reasons) once we choose an API we will be "stuck" with it forever. This is one of the topics where I intentially choose Performance over Development velocity. We could spped up software development by choosing a ready built engines such as open source ImGUI, GoDot, QT etc. Though, "engines" isolate the software from underlying APIs, we may get constrained by the engine itself at some point in future. We rule out closed source engines such as Unity and Unreal Engine for pollitical reasons ! Fun Fact: This attitutde is sometimes called NIH Syndrome i.e. Not-Invented-Here Syndrome. ;) So coming back to lower level APIs, we have limited APIs on each of the Operating Systems. 

On windows, we have DirectX 9 / 10 / 11 / 12, OpenGL and Vulkan. OpenGL has been deprecated long back and newer graphics features such as Ray Tracing aren't supported by it. Vulkan is generally a 2nd class citizen in windows compared to DirectX. Hence we choose the most modern flavour DirectX12. Rememver, DirectX12 itself was 1st released in 2014. Hence setting it as a baseline requriement for our software is a reasonable decision. Hence DirectX12 is our ONLY graphics API for Windows Operating System. We support Windows 10 and 11 both for now (2025). This covers perhaps 90% of our target worldwide users. We also presume support of Heap_Tier_2 inside DirectX12. Note: Heap_Tier_2 started appearing in 2015/2016 timeline. What ShaderModel Level ? To be figured out. If you are feeling over-hyped to get deep down, read the 1st ( of 4 ) tutorial on DirectX12 [here](https://www.3dgep.com/learning-directx-12-1/). It is ~100 pages !

Next most "market-share" operating system is MacOS on Apple Devices. In Apple world, Metal APIs are the only recommended ( non-deprecated ) APIs, hence we go with Metal. Even Vulkan works though a translation layer such as MoltenVK etc. Still for performance and 1st party support, we choose Metal API. Mac Graphics / Metal API shall also be partially reusable on iPhone / iPad devices, since they also have Metal as the preferred API.

Next up is Linux ( Ubunty ) Operating System. This being open source operating sytem, open standard Vulkan is preferred here. We want our software to be available on even free operating systems. Hence we must have a Vulkan based US as well. Another reason for keeping this Vulkan inerface is due to overlap with Android Mobile Operating System. For Android Phones, we have only 2 options, deprecated OpenGL or modern Vulkan. Hence we choose Vulkan. The withil last 10 year version ! i.e. Vulkan 1.1.

Avove 3 APIs are for desktop application. Next up is Brower based engine. Here upcoming ( as on 2025) API named WebGPU is choosen-one. This is supported by all major web-browserv vendors i.e. Google Chorme, Apple Safari and Mozilla.

Having made avove decisions, we have to be realistic about our core-engineering-degree-holder software developers. We can't expect a chemical / civil / electrical / instrumentaion / mechianical background people/developers to be familier with such deep computer science concepts. Hence we structure our code in sort of mini-engine (NIH?), where adding a new UI element doesn't involve fidling deep down in graphics APIs. This will be sorted out progressively as our software matures.

Our softwar installer will verify that all the relevent APIs are present on the system, before installation. So this way, inside application, we don't check everytime whethere a particular feautre is supported by available hardware. Unless the initial installed-hardware itself changes. By default this check shouln't take more than a few micro-seconds during appication startups.
